Algorithm for File Updates in Python

(Course 7 – Module 4 Portfolio Activity)

Project Description

This project demonstrates how Python can be used to automate security-related tasks involving file handling. In this scenario, a healthcare company maintains an allow-list of IP addresses permitted to access restricted systems. A separate remove-list identifies IP addresses that should no longer have access.
Using Python, I created an algorithm that opens the allow-list file, parses its contents, removes unauthorized IP addresses, and updates the file with a revised list. This ensures that access control is consistently enforced and reduces manual security errors.

Open the File That Contains the Allow List

To read the allow list, I assigned the file name "allow_list.txt" to a variable and used a with statement to safely open the file.
The with keyword automatically handles opening and closing the file.

import_file = "allow_list.txt"

with open(import_file, "r") as file:
    ip_addresses = file.read()

Read the File Contents

I used the .read() method to convert the file’s contents into a single string. This allows me to manipulate the entire list before transforming it into a Python list.

ip_addresses = file.read()

Convert the String Into a List

To modify individual IP addresses, the string must be split into separate elements. I used .split() which separates text at whitespace by default and returns a list.

ip_addresses = ip_addresses.split()

Iterate Through the Remove List

The algorithm loops through the remove_list to check which IPs need to be removed.
I set up a for loop using element as the loop variable.

remove_list = ["192.168.1.5", "172.16.0.3"]

for element in remove_list:

Remove IP Addresses That Are on the Remove List

Inside the loop, I added a conditional to check whether the current element exists in the ip_addresses list.
If it does, the .remove() method deletes it.

for element in remove_list:
    if element in ip_addresses:
        ip_addresses.remove(element)


The .remove() method works cleanly here because there are no duplicate IPs in the allow-list file, ensuring each removal happens only once.

Update the File With the Revised List of IP Addresses

After removing unauthorized IPs, I converted the list back into a string using "\n".join(), ensuring each IP appears on its own line.
Then, I opened the file again in write mode to overwrite it with the revised list.

updated_ip_addresses = "\n".join(ip_addresses)

with open(import_file, "w") as file:
    file.write(updated_ip_addresses)

Summary

This Python algorithm automates an essential security task: maintaining an accurate allow-list of IP addresses.
First, the script opens and reads the allow-list file, then converts its contents into a manageable Python list. Next, it loops through a remove-list to delete unauthorized IPs, ensuring the access list stays compliant with internal policies. Finally, the algorithm writes the updated list back to the file in a clean, structured format.
This approach reduces human error, supports consistent access control, and demonstrates how Python can streamline routine security operations.
