File Permissions in Linux
Project Description

In this project, I used Linux commands to view and manage file and directory permissions within the projects directory. I checked detailed file information using ls -la, interpreted the 10-character permissions string, updated file permissions according to organizational policy, modified permissions on a hidden file, and secured a directory so only the owner could access it. This demonstrates practical authorization and access-control skills in a Linux environment.

Check File and Directory Details

To view all files—including hidden files—with detailed permissions, I used:

ls -la


This command displays:

File type

Permission string

Number of links

Owner

Group

Size

Date

File or directory name

Example output (based on the Current File Permissions document):

drwxr-xr-x  3 researcher2 researcher2 4096 projects
-rw-rw-rw-  1 researcher2 researcher2 1024 notes.txt
-rwxr-xr--  1 researcher2 researcher2 2048 script.sh
-rw-rw----  1 researcher2 researcher2  512 .project_x.txt
drwxrwxr-x  2 researcher2 researcher2 4096 drafts

Describe the Permissions String

Example permission string:

-rw-rw-rw-


This 10-character string represents:

Character 1 — -
Indicates a regular file.

Characters 2–4 — rw-
Owner can read and write.

Characters 5–7 — rw-
Group can read and write.

Characters 8–10 — rw-
Others can read and write.

This means everyone (owner, group, and others) has read and write access.

Change File Permissions

The organization does not allow "others" to have write access to any files.

From the output, notes.txt had:

-rw-rw-rw-


The final three characters (rw-) showed that others had write access.

Command used:
chmod o-w notes.txt

Result:
-rw-rw-r--


Explanation:
This command removes write permission from the "others" category while keeping owner and group permissions unchanged.

Change File Permissions on a Hidden File

The .project_x.txt file should:

Have no write permissions for anyone

Be readable by the user

Be readable by the group

Not be accessible by others

Command used:
chmod 440 .project_x.txt

Result:
-r--r-----


Explanation:
440 gives read-only access to the user and group, while denying all permissions to others.

Change Directory Permissions

Only researcher2 should be able to access the drafts/ directory.

Command used:
chmod 700 drafts/

Result:
drwx------


Explanation:
This gives the owner full permissions (read, write, execute) and removes all permissions for group and others. Only the owner may enter or modify the directory.

Summary

In this project, I demonstrated key Linux authorization skills, including checking file and directory permissions with ls -la, interpreting permission strings, and modifying access rights using chmod. I restricted write access for others, secured a hidden file used for archival purposes, and locked down a directory to allow only the owner to access it. These steps are essential for maintaining security and enforcing least-privilege principles in Linux environments.
